README.md, before:

---
typora-root-url: ./
---

# Linux_QUICK_START
This is a tool that quickly help you to build up the Linux on HWJ-SoC. Now it is used for building the kernel for UCTECHIP WH series processors. 

This article is roughly divided into four parts:

* [Building the toolchain](#Building-the-toolchain)

* [Building the OpenOCD](#Building-the-OpenOCD)

* [Building the Image](#Building-the-Image)

* [Upload the Image](#Upload-the-Image)



## Building the toolchain

### Prerequisites

Several standard packages are needed to build the toolchain.  On Ubuntu, executing the following command should suffice:

```
$ sudo apt-get install autoconf automake autotools-dev curl python3 libmpc-dev libmpfr-dev libgmp-dev gawk build-essential bison flex texinfo gperf libtool patchutils bc zlib1g-dev libexpat-dev
```

On Fedora/CentOS/RHEL OS, executing the following command should suffice:

```
$ sudo yum install autoconf automake python3 libmpc-devel mpfr-devel gmp-devel gawk  bison flex texinfo patchutils gcc gcc-c++ zlib-devel expat-devel
```

On OS X, you can use [Homebrew](http://brew.sh) to install the dependencies:

```
$ brew install python3 gawk gnu-sed gmp mpfr libmpc isl zlib expat
```



### Download the toolchain sources

```
$ git clone --recursive https://github.com/riscv/riscv-gnu-toolchain
```

​	or

```
$ git clone https://github.com/riscv/riscv-gnu-toolchain
$ cd riscv-gnu-toolchain
$ git submodule update --init --recursive
```



Checkout to the branch 

```
$ git checkout 2c037e631e27bc01582476f5b3c5d5e9e51489b8 -b tmp
$ git submodule update
```



### Installation

#### glibc

If you run the Linux on a 32-bit processor, then type the following command:

```
$ ./configure --prefix=/path/you/want/to/install --with-arch=rv32gc --with-abi=ilp32d
$ make linux
```

If you run on a 64-bit processor, run the following command:

```
$ ./configure --prefix=/path/you/want/to/install --with-arch=rv64gc --with-abi=lp64d
$ make linux
```
#### newlibc

Build the newlib toolchain:

```
$ ./configure --prefix=/path/you/want/to/install --enable-multilib
$ make
```

#### Add the path to system environment

Add the installation path of toolchain to the system environment:

``` 
$ export PATH=$(PATH):/path/you/want/to/install/bin
```

>  I suggest you to add the *toolchain path* to the system environment by adding it to the ~/.bashrc
>
> So that it will be convenient to compile next time



Test the toolchain by typing the following command to the Termial:

```
$ riscv[32|64]-unknown-linux-gcc -v
$ riscv64-unknown-elf-gcc -v
```

You will see the version information if you compile it completely and add the installation path to the system environment successfully.



## Building the OpenOCD

### Getting the sources of code

```
$ git clone https://github.com/UCTECHIP/riscv-openocd.git
```

### Building the source code

```
$ cd riscv-openocd
$ ./bootstrap
$ ./configure --enable-ftdi --prefix=/path/you/want/to/install
$ make && make install
```

#### Add the path to system environment

Add the installation path of OpenOCD to the system environment:

``` 
$ export PATH=$(PATH):/path/you/want/to/install/bin
```

Test the OpenOCD by typing the following command to the Termial:

```
￼$ openocd -v 
```



You will see the version information if you compile it completely and add the installation path to the system environment successfully.

## Building the Image

### Getting the sources of code

This repository uses submodules. You need the --recursive option to fetch the submodules automatically

```
$ git clone --recursive https://github.com/UCTECHIP/Linux_QUICK_START.git
```
Alternatively :
```
$ git clone https://github.com/UCTECHIP/Linux_QUICK_START.git 

$ cd Linux_QUICK_START

$ git submodule update --init --recursive
```



### Building the Linux Image 

1. First you need to select the processor,hart number and FPGA develop board after typing the command:

```
$ make menuconfig
```

![](/figures/configure.png)

You can also run  `$ make list-defconfigs` to see the defconfigs of WH processors. 

For example, you can run `$ make WH32-HWJ_defconfig` to select WH32 as the building target for LS-Extended Board.

   

2. When you done with the configuration, you should run `$ make all` to start building the Linux Image which includes the rootfs, build with busybox, and opensbi.

P.S. You should type the  password of you PC for creating the character device *console* and *null*

![](/figures/passward.png)



3. You can find the finally Image in the directory *build/output*.

![](/figures/complete.png)



## Upload the Image

For some reasons, we only use the newlib-toolchain to upload the program. If you don't have a newlib toolchain, you should build a [newlib-toolchain](#newlibc).



1. Change the **HOST_IP** with your PC's IP in the file *Upload.in*

2. Make sure you have already connected your PC to the FPGA board. And then configure your serial port correctly(115200,8E1).

3. Use the Openocd to connect:
```
$ make run_opneocd
```
4. Open another terminal and type the following command to upload the Image to the DDR of the FPGA board:

```
$ make upload
```

If everything right, you can find the similar information in your serial port.

____                    _____ ____ _____
```
OpenSBI v0.6
   ____                    _____ ____ _____
  / __ \                  / ____|  _ \_   _|
 | |  | |_ __   ___ _ __ | (___ | |_) || |
 | |  | | '_ \ / _ \ '_ \ \___ \|  _ < | |
 | |__| | |_) |  __/ | | |____) | |_) || |_
  \____/| .__/ \___|_| |_|_____/|____/_____|
        | |
        |_|

Platform Name          : WH
Platform HART Features : RV64ACDFIMSUX
Platform Max HARTs     : 2
Current Hart           : 0
Firmware Base          : 0x40000000
Firmware Size          : 72 KB
Runtime SBI Version    : 0.2

MIDELEG : 0x0000000000000222
MEDELEG : 0x000000000000b109
PMP0    : 0x0000000040000000-0x000000004001ffff (A)
PMP1    : 0x0000000000000000-0x00000007ffffffff (A,R,W,X)
[    0.000000] OF: fdt: Ignoring memory range 0x40000000 - 0x40200000
[    0.000000] Linux version 4.19.0 (viking@viking-uctechip) (gcc version 9.2.0 (GCC)) #2 SMP Fri Dec 
25 17:06:10 CST 2020
[    0.000000] bootconsole [early0] enabled
[    0.000000] initrd not found or empty - disabling initrd
[    0.000000] Zone ranges:
[    0.000000]   DMA32    [mem 0x0000000040200000-0x000000007fffffff]
[    0.000000]   Normal   [mem 0x0000000080000000-0x000007ffffffffff]
[    0.000000] Movable zone start for each node
[    0.000000] Early memory node ranges
[    0.000000]   node   0: [mem 0x0000000040200000-0x000000007fffffff]
[    0.000000] Initmem setup node 0 [mem 0x0000000040200000-0x000000007fffffff]
[    0.000000] On node 0 totalpages: 261632
[    0.000000]   DMA32 zone: 4088 pages used for memmap
[    0.000000]   DMA32 zone: 0 pages reserved
[    0.000000]   DMA32 zone: 261632 pages, LIFO batch:63
[    0.000000] elf_hwcap is 0x112d
[    0.000000] percpu: Embedded 15 pages/cpu @(____ptrval____) s24384 r8192 d28864 u61440
[    0.000000] pcpu-alloc: s24384 r8192 d28864 u61440 alloc=15*4096
[    0.000000] pcpu-alloc: [0] 0 [0] 1 
[    0.000000] Built 1 zonelists, mobility grouping on.  Total pages: 257544
[    0.000000] Kernel command line: console=ttyWH0,115200n8  debug loglevel=8
[    0.000000] Dentry cache hash table entries: 131072 (order: 8, 1048576 bytes)
[    0.000000] Inode-cache hash table entries: 65536 (order: 7, 524288 bytes)
[    0.000000] Sorting __ex_table...
[    0.000000] Memory: 1013896K/1046528K available (2046K kernel code, 188K rwdata, 908K rodata, 11175
K init, 239K bss, 32632K reserved, 0K cma-reserved)
[    0.000000] random: get_random_u64 called from cache_random_seq_create+0x3a/0xd2 with crng_init=0
[    0.000000] SLUB: HWalign=64, Order=0-3, MinObjects=0, CPUs=2, Nodes=1
[    0.000000] rcu: Hierarchical RCU implementation.
[    0.000000] rcu:     RCU restricting CPUs from NR_CPUS=8 to nr_cpu_ids=2.
[    0.000000] rcu: Adjusting geometry for rcu_fanout_leaf=16, nr_cpu_ids=2
[    0.000000] NR_IRQS: 0, nr_irqs: 0, preallocated irqs: 0
[    0.000000] plic: mapped 15 interrupts to 2 (out of 4) handlers.
[    0.000000] clocksource: riscv_clocksource: mask: 0xffffffffffffffff max_cycles: 0x171024e6b, max_i
dle_ns: 1763180809207 ns
[    0.000000] Console: colour dummy device 80x25
[    0.010000] Calibrating delay loop (skipped), value calculated using timer frequency.. 3.12 BogoMIP
S (lpj=15625)
[    0.020000] pid_max: default: 4096 minimum: 301
[    0.030000] Mount-cache hash table entries: 2048 (order: 2, 16384 bytes)
[    0.040000] Mountpoint-cache hash table entries: 2048 (order: 2, 16384 bytes)
[    0.070000] rcu: Hierarchical SRCU implementation.
[    0.090000] smp: Bringing up secondary CPUs ...
[    0.100000] smp: Brought up 1 node, 2 CPUs
[    0.120000] devtmpfs: initialized
[    0.140000] clocksource: jiffies: mask: 0xffffffff max_cycles: 0xffffffff, max_idle_ns: 19112604462
750000 ns
[    0.150000] futex hash table entries: 16 (order: -2, 1024 bytes)
[    0.160000] NET: Registered protocol family 16
[    0.240000] clocksource: Switched to clocksource riscv_clocksource
[    0.340000] NET: Registered protocol family 1
[   16.950000] workingset: timestamp_bits=46 max_order=18 bucket_order=0
[   17.140000] Block layer SCSI generic (bsg) driver version 0.4 loaded (major 254)
[   17.150000] io scheduler noop registered
[   17.160000] io scheduler deadline registered
[   17.170000] io scheduler cfq registered (default)
[   17.180000] io scheduler mq-deadline registered
[   17.190000] io scheduler kyber registered
[   17.800000] UCTECHIP WH UART device driver
[   17.800000] 10000010.serial: ttyWH0 at MMIO 0x10000010 (irq = 1, base_baud = 3125000) is a WH UART
[   17.820000] console [ttyWH0] enabled
[   17.820000] console [ttyWH0] enabled
[   17.830000] bootconsole [early0] disabled
[   17.830000] bootconsole [early0] disabled
[   17.990000] loop: module loaded
[   18.000000] NET: Registered protocol family 17
[   18.010000] NET: Registered protocol family 15
[   18.020000] wh_uart: able to attach WH UART 0 interrupt vector=1
[   18.240000] Freeing unused kernel memory: 11172K
[   18.240000] This architecture does not have kernel memory protection.
[   18.250000] Run /init as init process

Please press Enter to activate this console. 
```

Commit message:

[host-tools]: add the shell script for giving access to USE devices

README.md, after:

---
typora-root-url: ./
---

# Linux_QUICK_START
This is a tool that quickly help you to build up the Linux on HWJ-SoC. Now it is used for building the kernel for UCTECHIP WH series processors. 

This article is roughly divided into four parts:

* [Building the toolchain](#Building-the-toolchain)

* [Building the OpenOCD](#Building-the-OpenOCD)

* [Building the Image](#Building-the-Image)

* [Upload the Image](#Upload-the-Image)



## Building the toolchain

### Prerequisites

Several standard packages are needed to build the toolchain.  On Ubuntu, executing the following command should suffice:

```
$ sudo apt-get install autoconf automake autotools-dev curl python3 libmpc-dev libmpfr-dev libgmp-dev gawk build-essential bison flex texinfo gperf libtool patchutils bc zlib1g-dev libexpat-dev
```

On Fedora/CentOS/RHEL OS, executing the following command should suffice:

```
$ sudo yum install autoconf automake python3 libmpc-devel mpfr-devel gmp-devel gawk  bison flex texinfo patchutils gcc gcc-c++ zlib-devel expat-devel
```

On OS X, you can use [Homebrew](http://brew.sh) to install the dependencies:

```
$ brew install python3 gawk gnu-sed gmp mpfr libmpc isl zlib expat
```



### Download the toolchain sources

```
$ git clone --recursive https://github.com/riscv/riscv-gnu-toolchain
```

​	or

```
$ git clone https://github.com/riscv/riscv-gnu-toolchain
$ cd riscv-gnu-toolchain
$ git submodule update --init --recursive
```



Checkout to the branch 

```
$ git checkout 2c037e631e27bc01582476f5b3c5d5e9e51489b8 -b tmp
$ git submodule update
```



### Installation

#### glibc

If you run the Linux on a 32-bit processor, then type the following command:

```
$ ./configure --prefix=/path/you/want/to/install --with-arch=rv32gc --with-abi=ilp32d
$ make linux
```

If you run on a 64-bit processor, run the following command:

```
$ ./configure --prefix=/path/you/want/to/install --with-arch=rv64gc --with-abi=lp64d
$ make linux
```
#### newlibc

Build the newlib toolchain:

```
$ ./configure --prefix=/path/you/want/to/install --enable-multilib
$ make
```

#### Add the path to system environment

Add the installation path of toolchain to the system environment:

``` 
$ export PATH=$(PATH):/path/you/want/to/install/bin
```

>  I suggest you to add the *toolchain path* to the system environment by adding it to the ~/.bashrc
>
> So that it will be convenient to compile next time



Test the toolchain by typing the following command to the Terminal:

```
$ riscv[32|64]-unknown-linux-gcc -v
$ riscv64-unknown-elf-gcc -v
```

You will see the version information if you compile it completely and add the installation path to the system environment successfully.



## Building the OpenOCD

### Getting the sources of code

```
$ git clone https://github.com/UCTECHIP/riscv-openocd.git
```

### Building the source code

```
$ cd riscv-openocd
$ ./bootstrap
$ ./configure --enable-ftdi --prefix=/path/you/want/to/install
$ make && make install
```

#### Add the path to system environment

Add the installation path of OpenOCD to the system environment:

``` 
$ export PATH=$(PATH):/path/you/want/to/install/bin
```

Test the OpenOCD by typing the following command to the Terminal:

```
￼$ openocd -v 
```

You will see the version information if you compile it completely and add the installation path to the system environment successfully.

#### Enable Access to USB Devices

By default, most Linux distributions do not give users permissions to access USB devices. One either needs root access or to be given the appropriate permissions. So you need to follow the next steps to enable the OS access to USB devices without sudo permissions.

```
$ cd host-tools
$ ./create_rule.sh
$ sudo cp 99-myusb.rules /etc/udev/rules.d/
$ sudo udevadm control --reload
```



## Building the Image

### Getting the sources of code

This repository uses submodules. You need the --recursive option to fetch the submodules automatically

```
$ git clone --recursive https://github.com/UCTECHIP/Linux_QUICK_START.git
```
Alternatively :
```
$ git clone https://github.com/UCTECHIP/Linux_QUICK_START.git 

$ cd Linux_QUICK_START

$ git submodule update --init --recursive
```



### Building the Linux Image 

1. First you need to select the processor,hart number and FPGA develop board after typing the command:

```
$ make menuconfig
```

![](/figures/configure.png)

You can also run  `$ make list-defconfigs` to see the defconfigs of WH processors. 

For example, you can run `$ make WH32-HWJ_defconfig` to select WH32 as the building target for LS-Extended Board.

   

2. When you done with the configuration, you should run `$ make all` to start building the Linux Image which includes the rootfs, build with busybox, and opensbi.

P.S. You should type the  password of you PC for creating the character device *console* and *null*

![](/figures/passward.png)



3. You can find the finally Image in the directory *build/output*.

![](/figures/complete.png)



## Upload the Image

For some reasons, we only use the newlib-toolchain to upload the program. If you don't have a newlib toolchain, you should build a [newlib-toolchain](#newlibc).



1. Change the **HOST_IP** with your PC's IP in the file *Upload.in*

2. Make sure you have already connected your PC to the FPGA board. And then configure your serial port correctly(115200,8E1).

3. Use the Openocd to connect:
```
$ make run_opneocd
```
4. Open another terminal and type the following command to upload the Image to the DDR of the FPGA board:

```
$ make upload
```

If everything right, you can find the similar information in your serial port.

____                    _____ ____ _____
```
OpenSBI v0.6
   ____                    _____ ____ _____
  / __ \                  / ____|  _ \_   _|
 | |  | |_ __   ___ _ __ | (___ | |_) || |
 | |  | | '_ \ / _ \ '_ \ \___ \|  _ < | |
 | |__| | |_) |  __/ | | |____) | |_) || |_
  \____/| .__/ \___|_| |_|_____/|____/_____|
        | |
        |_|

Platform Name          : WH
Platform HART Features : RV64ACDFIMSUX
Platform Max HARTs     : 2
Current Hart           : 0
Firmware Base          : 0x40000000
Firmware Size          : 72 KB
Runtime SBI Version    : 0.2

MIDELEG : 0x0000000000000222
MEDELEG : 0x000000000000b109
PMP0    : 0x0000000040000000-0x000000004001ffff (A)
PMP1    : 0x0000000000000000-0x00000007ffffffff (A,R,W,X)
[    0.000000] OF: fdt: Ignoring memory range 0x40000000 - 0x40200000
[    0.000000] Linux version 4.19.0 (viking@viking-uctechip) (gcc version 9.2.0 (GCC)) #2 SMP Fri Dec 
25 17:06:10 CST 2020
[    0.000000] bootconsole [early0] enabled
[    0.000000] initrd not found or empty - disabling initrd
[    0.000000] Zone ranges:
[    0.000000]   DMA32    [mem 0x0000000040200000-0x000000007fffffff]
[    0.000000]   Normal   [mem 0x0000000080000000-0x000007ffffffffff]
[    0.000000] Movable zone start for each node
[    0.000000] Early memory node ranges
[    0.000000]   node   0: [mem 0x0000000040200000-0x000000007fffffff]
[    0.000000] Initmem setup node 0 [mem 0x0000000040200000-0x000000007fffffff]
[    0.000000] On node 0 totalpages: 261632
[    0.000000]   DMA32 zone: 4088 pages used for memmap
[    0.000000]   DMA32 zone: 0 pages reserved
[    0.000000]   DMA32 zone: 261632 pages, LIFO batch:63
[    0.000000] elf_hwcap is 0x112d
[    0.000000] percpu: Embedded 15 pages/cpu @(____ptrval____) s24384 r8192 d28864 u61440
[    0.000000] pcpu-alloc: s24384 r8192 d28864 u61440 alloc=15*4096
[    0.000000] pcpu-alloc: [0] 0 [0] 1 
[    0.000000] Built 1 zonelists, mobility grouping on.  Total pages: 257544
[    0.000000] Kernel command line: console=ttyWH0,115200n8  debug loglevel=8
[    0.000000] Dentry cache hash table entries: 131072 (order: 8, 1048576 bytes)
[    0.000000] Inode-cache hash table entries: 65536 (order: 7, 524288 bytes)
[    0.000000] Sorting __ex_table...
[    0.000000] Memory: 1013896K/1046528K available (2046K kernel code, 188K rwdata, 908K rodata, 11175
K init, 239K bss, 32632K reserved, 0K cma-reserved)
[    0.000000] random: get_random_u64 called from cache_random_seq_create+0x3a/0xd2 with crng_init=0
[    0.000000] SLUB: HWalign=64, Order=0-3, MinObjects=0, CPUs=2, Nodes=1
[    0.000000] rcu: Hierarchical RCU implementation.
[    0.000000] rcu:     RCU restricting CPUs from NR_CPUS=8 to nr_cpu_ids=2.
[    0.000000] rcu: Adjusting geometry for rcu_fanout_leaf=16, nr_cpu_ids=2
[    0.000000] NR_IRQS: 0, nr_irqs: 0, preallocated irqs: 0
[    0.000000] plic: mapped 15 interrupts to 2 (out of 4) handlers.
[    0.000000] clocksource: riscv_clocksource: mask: 0xffffffffffffffff max_cycles: 0x171024e6b, max_i
dle_ns: 1763180809207 ns
[    0.000000] Console: colour dummy device 80x25
[    0.010000] Calibrating delay loop (skipped), value calculated using timer frequency.. 3.12 BogoMIP
S (lpj=15625)
[    0.020000] pid_max: default: 4096 minimum: 301
[    0.030000] Mount-cache hash table entries: 2048 (order: 2, 16384 bytes)
[    0.040000] Mountpoint-cache hash table entries: 2048 (order: 2, 16384 bytes)
[    0.070000] rcu: Hierarchical SRCU implementation.
[    0.090000] smp: Bringing up secondary CPUs ...
[    0.100000] smp: Brought up 1 node, 2 CPUs
[    0.120000] devtmpfs: initialized
[    0.140000] clocksource: jiffies: mask: 0xffffffff max_cycles: 0xffffffff, max_idle_ns: 19112604462
750000 ns
[    0.150000] futex hash table entries: 16 (order: -2, 1024 bytes)
[    0.160000] NET: Registered protocol family 16
[    0.240000] clocksource: Switched to clocksource riscv_clocksource
[    0.340000] NET: Registered protocol family 1
[   16.950000] workingset: timestamp_bits=46 max_order=18 bucket_order=0
[   17.140000] Block layer SCSI generic (bsg) driver version 0.4 loaded (major 254)
[   17.150000] io scheduler noop registered
[   17.160000] io scheduler deadline registered
[   17.170000] io scheduler cfq registered (default)
[   17.180000] io scheduler mq-deadline registered
[   17.190000] io scheduler kyber registered
[   17.800000] UCTECHIP WH UART device driver
[   17.800000] 10000010.serial: ttyWH0 at MMIO 0x10000010 (irq = 1, base_baud = 3125000) is a WH UART
[   17.820000] console [ttyWH0] enabled
[   17.820000] console [ttyWH0] enabled
[   17.830000] bootconsole [early0] disabled
[   17.830000] bootconsole [early0] disabled
[   17.990000] loop: module loaded
[   18.000000] NET: Registered protocol family 17
[   18.010000] NET: Registered protocol family 15
[   18.020000] wh_uart: able to attach WH UART 0 interrupt vector=1
[   18.240000] Freeing unused kernel memory: 11172K
[   18.240000] This architecture does not have kernel memory protection.
[   18.250000] Run /init as init process

Please press Enter to activate this console. 
```
